Academic Editor: Vasilis Friderikos
Received: 11 April 2025
Revised: 15 May 2025
Accepted: 22 May 2025
Published: 27 May 2025
Citation: Amahrouch, A.; Saadi, Y.; El
Kafhali, S. Optimizing Energy
Efficiency in Cloud Data Centers: A
Reinforcement Learning-Based Virtual
Machine Placement Strategy. Network
2025, 5, 17. https://doi.org/10.3390/
network5020017
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Optimizing Energy Efficiency in Cloud Data Centers:
A Reinforcement Learning-Based Virtual Machine
Placement Strategy
Abdelhadi Amahrouch 1
, Youssef Saadi 1
and Said El Kafhali 2,*
1
Data Science for Sustainable Earth Laboratory, Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, Sultan Moulay Slimane
University, Beni Mellal 23010, Morocco; abdelhadi.amahrouch@usms.ma (A.A.); y.saadi@usms.ma (Y.S.)
2
Computer, Networks, Modeling, and Mobility Laboratory (IR2M), Faculty of Sciences and Techniques,
Hassan First University of Settat, Settat 26000, Morocco
*
Correspondence: said.elkafhali@uhp.ac.ma
Abstract: Cloud computing faces growing challenges in energy consumption due to the
increasing demand for services and resource usage in data centers. To address this issue,
we propose a novel energy-efficient virtual machine (VM) placement strategy that inte-
grates reinforcement learning (Q-learning), a Firefly optimization algorithm, and a VM
sensitivity classification model based on random forest and self-organizing map. The pro-
posed method, RLVMP, classifies VMs as sensitive or insensitive and dynamically allocates
resources to minimize energy consumption while ensuring compliance with service level
agreements (SLAs). Experimental results using the CloudSim simulator, adapted with data
from Microsoft Azure, show that our model significantly reduces energy consumption.
Specifically, under the lr_1.2_mmt strategy, our model achieves a 5.4% reduction in energy
consumption compared to PABFD, 12.8% compared to PSO, and 12% compared to genetic
algorithms. Under the iqr_1.5_mc strategy, the reductions are even more significant: 12.11%
compared to PABFD, 15.6% compared to PSO, and 18.67% compared to genetic algorithms.
Furthermore, our model reduces the number of live migrations, which helps minimize
SLA violations. Overall, the combination of Q-learning and the Firefly algorithm enables
adaptive, SLA-compliant VM placement with improved energy efficiency.
Keywords: cloud computing; server consolidation; energy consumption; firefly optimization;
machine learning; Q-learning
1. Introduction
In the early days of computing, processing power was both scarce and costly. The
emergence of cloud computing, however, has completely reshaped this landscape by
making computational resources more accessible and affordable [1]. This shift has played a
key role in democratizing access to digital services and transforming not just the ICT sector
but also a wide range of industries.
Yet, the growing reliance on cloud infrastructure brings with it new challenges
—particularly in terms of energy consumption. While cloud computing is generally cost-
effective, the rapid expansion of digital services and data storage has contributed to a
sharp increase in the energy demands of data centers and telecommunications networks [2].
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), these facilities account for roughly 1%
of global electricity use—a figure that could climb to between 3% and 13% by 2030 [3].
Reports from Greenpeace and research institutions such as the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory highlight this upward trend. For instance, U.S. data centers alone
Network 2025, 5, 17
https://doi.org/10.3390/network5020017
Network 2025, 5, 17
2 of 24
consumed nearly 2% of the country’s electricity in 2020. As the demand for cloud ser-
vices continues to rise, addressing this growing energy footprint has become a pressing
concern. Promoting sustainable cloud infrastructure calls for targeted actions such as
improving hardware efficiency, increasing the use of renewable energy, and enhancing
server utilization rates [4].
One of the key challenges in data center optimization is deciding where to place virtual
machines (VMs). When VMs are poorly distributed across servers, it can cause thermal
imbalances, inefficient cooling, and congested network paths—all of which increase energy
consumption and degrade system performance [5]. For example, concentrating VMs in one
area can cause hotspots, increasing cooling needs. On the other hand, uneven placement
might result in underused resources or excessive data traffic.
Moreover, poor VM placement can affect a provider’s ability to meet service level
agreements (SLAs). Hosting critical workloads on servers that are either overburdened
or underused can lead to performance issues, service interruptions, and potential SLA
violations [6]. To avoid these risks, placement strategies must not only aim to consolidate
resources efficiently but also maintain performance, respect thermal constraints, and uphold
service quality [7].
To address these challenges, researchers have developed intelligent placement algo-
rithms capable of dynamically adjusting VM allocation based on system conditions [8].
Techniques such as Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function Virtualiza-
tion (NFV) offer more agility in managing traffic, reducing latency, and improving system
responsiveness. Additionally, methods like live migration and workload balancing help
optimize energy use and reduce the likelihood of thermal hotspots [9].
Server consolidation is often used to reduce energy use, but it sometimes overlooks
how applications interact with users, especially in terms of latency sensitivity [10]. Moving
a latency-critical VM without considering its communication patterns can degrade ser-
vice quality and lead to SLA breaches. To prevent this, VM placement must go beyond
simple resource metrics and take into account the specific behavior and requirements of
each workload.
This paper aims to fill this gap by proposing an innovative hybrid strategy that
combines machine learning, reinforcement learning, and metaheuristic optimization to
dynamically and intelligently manage energy consumption in cloud environments. Unlike
traditional approaches that primarily rely on static rules or simple metrics, our approach
integrates workload behavior, particularly the sensitivity to latency, to optimize VM place-
ment decisions. By using reinforcement learning, our system can adapt to changing
conditions in real time, thereby optimizing energy consumption while respecting SLAs.
Additionally, the integration of the Firefly algorithm into this process expands the search
space and avoids local optima, contributing to a better exploration of potential solutions.
The remainder of the paper is organized in this way: Section 2 presents background
information and an overview of the principal algorithms used in the current study. Section 3
gives a detailed analysis of a number of proposed solutions that are relevant to our subject.
In Section 4, the dataset and system model are explained. Section 5 provides a clear founda-
tion for this inquiry by outlining the methodology and suggested technique. In Section 6,
the results are thoroughly analyzed and presented in detail. Section 7 concludes the article
by summarizing the key findings and suggesting potential avenues for future research.
2. Background
In the following sections, we will implement and evaluate several models from deep
learning (DL) and reinforcement learning (RL). Before proceeding, it is useful to define
Network 2025, 5, 17
3 of 24
these approaches within this framework to better understand their practical application to
our problem.
•
Random forests: Random forests are a robust and versatile supervised learning
method that combines several decision trees to improve the quality of predictions. Dur-
ing training, several decision trees are generated and their results aggregated, either by
majority voting for classification tasks or by averaging predictions for regression tasks.
By leveraging this ensemble approach, random forests improve accuracy and reduce
the risk of overfitting. Thanks to their ability to handle large-scale, complex datasets,
they are widely used in applications such as feature recognition, economic forecasting,
medical diagnosis, predicting CPU utilization [11], and many other fields [12].
•
Self-organizing maps (SOMs): The self-organizing map (SOM) is a type of artificial
neural network designed to function in an unsupervised manner. It is effective for
both dimensionality reduction and clustering tasks. SOMs project high-dimensional
data onto a lower-dimensional (typically 2D) grid, revealing the underlying structure
and relationships within the dataset. Competitive learning is used, in which grids
deform at the input, where grid neurons compete to represent data. SOMs improve
understanding of structures and relationships in data, with all their benefits for data
visualization, pattern recognition, and other exploratory activities [13].
•
Firefly: The Firefly optimization algorithm is a metaheuristic inspired by the flashing
behavior of fireflies [14]. It uses the fireflies’ brightness level to indicate candidate
solutions in which brighter fireflies attract others, causing them to move toward better
solutions in the search space. Two key parameters are the attractiveness coefficient and
the light absorption coefficient; the two guide the fireflies towards the best possible
solutions with minimal effort [15]. The total time complexity of the Firefly algorithm
is as follows: O(t ∗n ∗n ∗d), where
✔
t: The number of iterations the algorithm runs.
✔
n: The number of fireflies in the population.
✔
d: The number of dimensions in the search space.
•
Q-learning: Q-learning is a reinforcement learning algorithm that tries to select the
optimum action according to the current state of the environment. It is a model-free
algorithm. The basic concept of Q-learning is to learn a policy that tells an agent what
action to take under what circumstances. In order to achieve this, a Q-function is
formed that computes the utility or expected reward from performing a certain action
in a certain condition and applying the optimal policy afterward. The Q-function is
updated applying this formula [16].
Q(st, at) = (1 −β) × Q(st, at) + β × (rt + λ × max Q(st+1, at))
(1)
where
•
Q(st, at) represents the current Q-value for state st and action at.
•
β is the learning rate, indicating how quickly data on new states will be considered in
subsequent steps β ∈[0, 1].
•
rt is the reward received after taking action at in state st.
•
λ is the Discount factor, a parameter λ ∈[0, 1] that determines the importance of
future rewards.
•
maxQ(st+1, at) is an estimation of the optimal Q-value in the future.
•
If β = 0, the agent does not learn to improve its future actions.
•
If β = 1, the agent relies entirely on the most recent experiences to guide its actions.
•
If λ = 0, it means that the agent is only concerned with immediate rewards and does
not consider future rewards at all.
Network 2025, 5, 17
4 of 24
•
If λ = 1, this means the agent fully considers future rewards, values them equally to
immediate ones, and treats them with the same importance as immediate rewards.
When the agent receives the state st again, it chooses the action with the maximum
Q-value. A policy for selecting the best action in state st is defined as follows.
π(s) = max
at∈AQ(s, at)
(2)
Thus, the goal of the learning agent is to find the optimal policy mapping states (S) to
actions (A) in a way that maximizes the expected long-term reward for action execution. To
choose the control action, the learning agent can use either of two techniques: (i) random
action selection at the beginning of the management process (training period) or (ii) action
selection defined by the policy.
3. Related Work
Jeong et al. [17] introduced an innovative approach to virtual machine (VM) consolida-
tion, employing a Transformer-based Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) method to tackle
the complexity and inefficiency inherent in operating Software-Defined Network-enabled
Network Function Virtualization (SDN-enabled NFV). The common practice of distributing
Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) as VMs across servers often results in energy loss due to
irregular deployment patterns. The proposed methodology focuses on enhancing energy ef-
ficiency while concurrently optimizing the performance of Service Function Chains (SFCs).
Through a refined VM consolidation process and the utilization of a more sophisticated
DRL method, this approach holds the promise of providing a significantly more efficient
solution to VM consolidation challenges within SDN-enabled NFV environments.
Mikram et al. [18] discuss the significance of task scheduling and assignment in cloud
computing due to the migration of applications from traditional environments. They em-
phasize the challenges of efficiently utilizing shared resources while ensuring quality of
service and minimizing the carbon footprint. The paper underscores the importance of
employing effective task strategies tailored to client requirements and IT resource capaci-
ties. Additionally, it highlights the relevance of optimizing resource utilization and task
execution times. The article introduced optimization techniques such as artificial bee colony
(ABC), cuckoo search (CS), and particle swarm optimization (PSO) for task distribution.
The objective of the paper is to analyze these algorithms based on energy consumption and
resource utilization.
Saadi et al. [19] focus on addressing the challenges of workload balancing and re-
source utilization in cloud scheduling to maximize the effectiveness and performance of
cloud computing systems. Workload balancing ensures that computing workloads are
evenly distributed across available resources, reducing the likelihood of resource con-
straints and enhancing system performance. Resource utilization aims to utilize processing
power, memory, and network bandwidth to their fullest capacity, improving the efficacy
and cost-effectiveness of the cloud infrastructure. To tackle these challenges, the study
proposes a novel optimization technique called CHPSO (Chi-squared particle swarm opti-
mization). The proposed algorithm demonstrates its effectiveness in optimizing resource
utilization compared to other algorithms such as PSO (particle swarm optimization) and
CS (cuckoo search).
Hilali et al. [20] emphasize the pivotal role of virtualization technology in cloud sys-
tems, which are among the fastest-growing energy consumers globally. Virtualization
technology plays a critical role in resource management, offering solutions to various
challenges in this area. Resource consolidation stands out as a widely used technique for
developing more efficient resource management policies. Specifically, virtual machine pack-
Network 2025, 5, 17
5 of 24
ing enables cloud data centers to transition from one state to a more optimized state. The
emergence of container-based cloud and containerized workloads has further expanded
consolidation opportunities. In their article, the authors focus on the consolidation of data
centers within distributed cloud systems. They provide a comprehensive overview of IT
consolidation across different levels of cloud services, including virtualized data centers
and consolidation techniques. Additionally, they offer a thematic taxonomy and discuss
consolidation solutions from the literature. The article concludes with a discussion of re-
search questions and proposed future directions in the field, highlighting their importance.
Gholipour et al. [21] address the growing demand for computational and storage
resources due to the increasing volume of computation and big data analysis. While
purchasing additional resources can be costly, cloud computing offers a solution through its
“pay as you go” plans, allowing users to pay only for the resources they utilize. However,
leveraging cloud technology presents challenges, particularly in resource management.
Resource management focuses on allocating resources to users efficiently, minimizing
waste. In their paper, the authors propose a novel energy-aware resource management
technique. This approach combines joint virtual machine (VM) and container consolidation
methods with the deep Q-learning algorithm to promote green computing in cloud data
centers. The aim is to reduce resource waste, migration rates, and energy consumption
through optimized resource allocation strategies.
Tran et al. [22] explore the challenges of efficiently managing virtual machines in cloud
data centers to balance economic costs and ensure quality of service (QoS) while increasing
end-user demands. They highlight the benefits of virtual machine migration, such as cost
savings, energy efficiency, improved performance, stability, and availability. However,
stakeholders’ objectives often conflict with each other, and the optimal resource allocation
problem in cloud infrastructure is typically NP-hard or NP-complete. In their paper, the
authors formulate the virtual migration problem using game theory to achieve both load
balance and resource utilization. They propose the V2PQL algorithm, which integrates
Markov decision processes and the Q-learning algorithm. Simulation results demonstrate
the efficiency of their proposal, which consists of training and extraction phases. The
V2PQL algorithm is benchmarked against other algorithms such as Round-Robin, inverse
Ant System, Max–Min Ant System, and Ant System, highlighting its strength and feasibility
in the extraction phase.
Yao Qin et al. [23] discuss the importance of multi-objective virtual machine (VM)
placement in data centers for achieving various goals. While this is an NP-hard problem,
numerous approaches have been proposed to address it. However, many existing meth-
ods overlook the selection of weights, which is crucial for multi-objective optimization.
Poorly chosen weights can lead to solutions deviating from the Pareto optimal set. The
authors propose a solution to this problem using the Chebyshev scalarization function
in multi-objective reinforcement learning (RL). Their proposed VM placement algorithm,
VMPMORL, leverages the Chebyshev scalarization function to find a Pareto approximate
set that minimizes both energy consumption and resource wastage simultaneously. Unlike
other multi-objective RL algorithms in VM placement, VMPMORL tackles the weight selec-
tion problem and utilizes the concept of the Pareto set. Comparative evaluations against
state-of-the-art algorithms demonstrate that VMPMORL achieves superior performance.
The approaches outlined in the literature address various aspects of virtual machine
(VM) consolidation and resource management, primarily focusing on energy efficiency,
task scheduling, and load balancing. As summarized in the Table 1, most previous works
(e.g., [18,19]) rely on heuristic or metaheuristic algorithms to optimize energy consump-
tion. However, they often neglect other critical factors such as SLA compliance and
VM sensitivity.
Network 2025, 5, 17
6 of 24
Table 1. Comparison of related methods for VM consolidation according to RL/DRL adoption,
energy optimization, SLA minimization, and VM sensitivity consideration.
Reference
Uses RL/DRL
VM
Sensitivity
Energy
Optimization
SLA
Violation
Main Methodology
Type
Mikram et al. [18]


脥
�

Heuristics and
Metaheuristics
Saadi et al. [19]
❌
❌
✅
❌
Heuristics
Gholipour et al. [21]
✅(DQL)
❌
✅
❌
DQL
Tran et al. [22]
✅(Q-learning)
❌
✅
✅
Hybrid: Q-learning +
Game Theory (V2PQL)
Yao Qin et al. [23]
✅(Multi-obj RL)
❌
✅
✅
RL
Our work
✅(RL + Firefly)
✅
✅
✅
Hybrid: Metaheuristic
(Firefly) + RL
✅indicates that the method was used, while the symbol❌means that the method was not used in the work.
Despite the emergence of reinforcement learning-based solutions in recent studies ([21–23]),
these methods often overlook the heterogeneity and sensitivity of VMs. This oversight can
result in suboptimal decisions, particularly for services that require high availability and
performance guarantees.
In contrast, our proposed framework introduces a context-aware and adaptive ar-
chitecture that effectively addresses these limitations. Initially, we utilize random forest
(RF) and self-organizing maps (SOMs) to classify VMs according to their sensitivity levels.
This classification step allows the system to differentiate between critical and non-critical
workloads. Subsequently, we apply Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) for dynamic
consolidation decisions, with its policy optimized by the Firefly algorithm to improve
convergence speed and avoid local minima.
This integrated pipeline not only improves adaptability to workload variations but
also strikes a better balance between energy consumption, SLA compliance, and service
quality. By reducing unnecessary migrations and accurately identifying VM importance,
our approach ensures more efficient resource management compared to previous work.
4. System Model
4.1. Power Model and QoS Metrics
4.1.1. Power Model
In our system model, a data center is defined as a collection of physical machines
(PMs). Each PM can host multiple VMs. The power model in a data center is determined
by the CPU, memory, storage, and cooling system, which primarily govern the energy con-
sumption of a server. Numerous studies [24] have shown that server energy consumption
is defined as a linear relationship to its CPU utilization:
E(u) = K × Emax + (1 −K) × Emax × u
(3)
where
■
Emax represents the energy consumed by a fully utilized server.
■
K represents the average consumption by an idle server.
■
u represents the CPU utilization.
Network 2025, 5, 17
7 of 24
Since CPU utilization can fluctuate over time due to workload variability, it is treated
as a time-dependent function, denoted as u(t). Therefore, to estimate a server’s total energy
consumption, the following formula is used:
Etotal(u) =
Z ∞
t
E(u(t))dt
(4)
4.1.2. QoS Metrics
A service level agreement (SLA) is a contract between an IT service provider and a
customer or client that outlines the services to be provided and the expected quality of
service. In cloud computing, SLA breaches occur when the service provider fails to meet
the agreed-upon terms. SLAs are critical as they establish specific security standards for
managing and storing data. To ensure compliance with the SLA, certain quality indicators
must be clearly defined, measured, analyzed, and regularly monitored. If the service
provider fails to fulfill their obligations, penalties may be applied. SLAs are typically used
to define quality of service criteria, which are essential in cloud computing, and may include
limitations such as maximum response time or minimum throughput time provided by the
deployed system. In [25], the authors defined SLA violation using two metrics in the IaaS
model: SLATAH and PDM.
SLATAH (SLA violation time per active host): Represents the percentage of time
in which servers experienced 100% CPU utilization.
The function is shown in the
equation below:
SLATAH =
N
∑
i=1
Tsi
Tai
(5)
where N is the number of physical machines (i.e., servers), Tsi is the total time of experienc-
ing 100% CPU utilization by server i, resulting in an SLA violation, and Tai is the total time
of server i being in the active state.
PDM: The overall performance degradation by virtual machines due to live migrations
(PDM) is shown in the equation below:
PDM = 1
M
Q
∑
j=0
Pdj
Prj
(6)
where M is the number of virtual machines, Pdj is the estimate of performance degradation
of virtual machine caused by migrations, and Prj is the total CPU capacity requested by
the virtual machine j during its life time. We set Pdj as 10% of CPU utilization in MIPS
during all live migrations of virtual machine j. We used the combined metric involving
performance degradation due both to overloaded servers and to VM migrations. SLAV
(SLA violation) is computed as follows.
SLAV = SLATAH × PDM
(7)
4.1.3. Live Migration Cost
Hot migration negatively affects the performance of applications running within a
virtual machine. An experimental study was conducted to investigate the extent of this
impact and to develop a modeling approach. It was found that performance degradation
and downtime depend on the application’s behavior, particularly how many memory
pages are updated during its execution. For web applications, the average performance
degradation and downtime are estimated to be around 10% of CPU utilization. This
suggests that each migration could lead to an SLA violation. Therefore, it is crucial to
minimize the number of virtual machine migrations. The duration of a hot migration
Network 2025, 5, 17
8 of 24
depends on the total memory used by the virtual machine and the available network
bandwidth. In our experiments, we define the performance degradation experienced by
the VM using the following formulas.
Ti,m = Di
Bi
(8)
Ud,i =
Z t0+Ti,m
t0
Ui(t)dt
(9)
where Ti,m is the time required to complete the migration, Di is the amount of memory used
by VMi Bi is the available network bandwidth, Ud,i is the total performance degradation by
VMi, t0 is the time when the migration begins, and Ui(t) is the CPU utilization by VMi.
4.2. The VM Classifier
4.2.1. Dataset Description
To apply machine or deep learning techniques effectively, data are essential, but they
are not enough. Data must be in a specific format and filtered to retain only those features
relevant to the end goal. Obtaining workload-tracking data in the cloud is a complex task
due to their pertinence and customer confidentiality concerns. Microsoft Azure virtual
machine traces, released in October 2017, address precisely this need by providing relevant
data. For this reason, it was decided to work with the 2019 workflow traces, which contain
up-to-date data [26].
Microsoft Azure, also known as Windows Azure, is Microsoft’s public cloud com-
puting platform. It provides a variety of cloud services, including computing, analytics,
storage, and networking. These services allow users to develop, scale, or manage existing
applications in the public cloud.
This section describes the Azure dataset, which represents traces from Azure’s virtual
machines (VMs). These traces offer a representative sample of the workloads of Azure VMs
in a specific geographic region.
The dataset used in this study spans 30 consecutive days and consists of 198 files,
totaling 235 GB. These files include the following:
Format description files with key-value pairs (schema.csv, category.txt, cores.txt,
cpu.txt, deployment.txt, lifetime.txt, memory.txt, deployments.csv, subscriptions.csv).
Time-series files (vm-cpu-readings-file-*-of-195.csv).
A summary file of the time-series data (vm-table.csv).
The traces represent a typical subset of the internal workloads of Azure VMs in a
specific geographic region. Figure 1 illustrates a comparison of the VM rates by class in this
trace against the overall Azure workload in 2019, highlighting their qualitative similarity.
The next section provides a detailed description of each file.
The vm-cpu-readings-*-of-195 file is a set of 195 files containing CPU usage traces
for virtual machines (VMs) over a 30-day period. Each file contains 1,048,576 records,
representing measurements taken every 5 min over a 20 min period. The difference
between measurements recorded in two consecutive files (vm-cpu-readings-*-de-195) is
200 min. These files are structured in five columns, described in detail below:
•
Timestamp: A timestamp in seconds starting from 0, with an increment of 200 s (5 min).
•
Vmid: The encrypted identifier of each virtual machine.
•
MinCPU: The minimum percentage of CPU usage.
•
MaxCPU: The maximum percentage of CPU usage.
•
AvgCPU: The average percentage of CPU usage.
Network 2025, 5, 17
9 of 24
 
Figure 1. Distribution of VM categories.
Azure public dataset vmtable contains information on around 2,695,548 virtual ma-
chines, provided in the file vmtable.csv. Below is a summary of the dataset:
•
2,695,548 is the total number of virtual machines in the dataset.
•
6687 is the total number of subscriptions in the dataset.
In addition, other statistical data points are provided from this dataset. These de-
tails offer insights into the composition and characteristics of the Azure VMs in the
specified dataset.
In our Q-learning module, we integrated a VM nature testing step during the VM
migration phase, utilizing a classification model based on machine learning (random forest)
combined with the self-organizing map (SOM) method. This model categorizes VMs into
two types: sensitive and insensitive. A sensitive VM is defined as one whose performance
—particularly response time and SLA compliance—is significantly affected by delays or
interruptions during migration or placement. These typically include latency-critical
applications such as real-time analytics or transactional databases. In contrast, insensitive
VMs run background tasks or batch processes that can tolerate temporary disruptions. This
classification was implemented using data from the Azure 2019 Vmtable file, enabling more
intelligent and SLA-aware migration decisions based on the VMs’ sensitivity to load and
performance variations.
In addition, our Q-learning module contains a dataset detailing the resource utiliza-
tion of Azure VMs Data Trace. This dataset tracks the resource usage of approximately
1000 randomly chosen VMs over a 10-day timeframe from 2019. It is important to em-
phasize that VMs used in training the machine-learning module are not included in our
approach. Below, we outline the data preparation procedure: We utilized the Azure vm-
cpu-readings-file-of-195 files for our analysis. Since the dataset records measurements
every 5 min for 20 min with a 200 min break, we iterated through the vm-cpu-readings-file-
of-195 files to construct the day (comprising 288 measurements, each taken every 5 min),
and we used the average value as the metric. Table 2 provides a clear description of the
dataset used in this study.
Table 2. Dataset description.
Dataset Characteristics
Description
Dataset storage type
Recording (matrix)
Dataset dimensionality
Two dimensions
Number of lines (number of samples)
2,695,548 records
Network 2025, 5, 17
10 of 24
Table 2. Cont.
Dataset Characteristics
Description
Number of columns (number of characteristics)
11
Characteristic type
Nominal and numeric
Missing data
No
Label unknown
Yes
Number of labels
2
Distribution of samples in each class
Unbalanced
Storage format
CSV
4.2.2. Proposed VM Classifier
In our previous work [27], we developed a VM classifier model using machine learning
techniques, specifically random forest (RF) and self-organizing maps (SOMs), as showed in
Figure 2.
 
Figure 2. Proposed VM classifier model.
This model categorizes VMs into two types: sensitive and insensitive. We utilized
data from the Azure 2019 Vmtable file to implement this process, allowing us to make
more informed migration decisions based on the VMs’ sensitivity to load and performance
variation. Our random forest classification method combined with self-organizing maps
(SOMs) produced excellent results, as shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Classification results of the final model.
Model
Accuracy
F1 Score
ROC AUC Score
Final model (RF + SOM)
0.8249
0.8241
0.8229
Acknowledging the imperative need for heightened classifier efficacy, we made the
deliberate decision to integrate the SOM technique. This additional layer was intended
to fine-tune our classification model, addressing any limitations observed in the initial
performance of the employed model.
5. Proposed Reinforcement Learning-Based VM Placement in Cloud
Environment Using RF_SOM Classifier
5.1. Reinforcement Learning Model
At time t, the agent observes the current state of all PMs, searches for an action using
the Q-learning algorithm, and sends the decided action to the PM for execution. Each
Network 2025, 5, 17
11 of 24
element of the state space S represents the current usage of CPU, RAM, network bandwidth,
and storage I/O of each VM on each PM as follows.
St = {{CPU1, RAM1, NET1, STIO1},
{CPU2, RAM2, NET2, STIO2},
. . . , {CPUm, RAMm, NETm, STIOm}}
(10)
where i = 1, . . . , m is the index id of the PM, m is the number of PM in the data center,
and CPUi ∈[0, 1], RAMi ∈[0, 1], NETi ∈[0, 1], STIOi ∈[0, 1]. Each resource utilization
indicator is normalized with respect to the maximum volume of the corresponding PM
resource. The action space is defined as a set:
A = {a1(t), a2(t), . . . ., am(t)}, ai(t) ∈{−1, 0, 1}, i = 1, m
(11)
Each action ai(t) ∈A transitions the PM to sleep mode or active mode before the next
management step st+1. The dynamic VM consolidation algorithm changes the mode of
each PM based on the agent’s decision. The agent then observes and computes the Q- value
after modifying all operating modes and completing the action taken but before the next
management step st+1. The main objective of the proposed algorithm is to minimize energy
consumption. The penalty for increased energy consumption can be defined as follows.
Pt(power) =
Powert
Powert−1 + ε + Psla
(12)
Psla = NbrVmssensitive
NbrAllVms
(13)
where the following are true:
•
ε equals 0.01
•
Powert is the power consumption in the current management step.
•
Powert−1 is the power consumption in the previous management step.
•
Psla means that, using of the (RF + SOM) model, the penalty for SLA violation can be
represented by the number of sensitive VMs over the overall number of VMs.
In this paper, we integrate multiple techniques—random forests (RF), self-organizing
maps (SOMs), Q-learning, and the Firefly algorithm (FA)—to address the complex problem
of energy-efficient VM placement and migration in cloud data centers. In Figure 3, we
present the overall architecture of our hybrid approach, where each component plays a
distinct role in achieving optimized resource management and SLA compliance. While this
integration might appear complex at first glance, each component serves a specific role that
enhances the overall system’s performance.
RF and SOM are initially used to classify VMs based on their sensitivity to latency. This
classification step improves the accuracy of the VM placement decision by distinguishing
sensitive VMs from insensitive ones. This classification directly informs the Q-learning
process, enabling it to adapt its policy based on VM sensitivity, thereby optimizing energy
consumption while ensuring SLA compliance. The Q-learning model continuously adjusts
the VM placement strategy based on real-time feedback, learning from previous placements
to improve future decisions.
The Firefly algorithm is employed during the migration phase to find energy-efficient
consolidation strategies, while taking into account VM sensitivity and SLA requirements.
Unlike simpler heuristics such as first fit or best fit, the Firefly algorithm offers a more
global search capability, effectively balancing exploration and exploitation to minimize
energy consumption and migration costs while ensuring SLA adherence.
Network 2025, 5, 17
12 of 24
Figure 3. Combined Q-learning–Firefly–VM classifier process.
Regarding the computational overhead, we ensure that the training of RF and SOM is
done offline, with the Q-learning model converging efficiently within about 200 episodes.
Once trained, the RF/SOM classification and Q-learning policy application are fast, operat-
ing in the millisecond range. The Firefly algorithm’s migration phase, though computa-
tionally more intensive, is optimized to run within a reasonable time, with the migration
overhead accounting for less than 5% of the total simulation time.
Network 2025, 5, 17
13 of 24
While the integration of these techniques adds complexity, we argue that this com-
bination enables our approach to outperform baseline algorithms in terms of energy con-
sumption, SLA violations, and VM migrations.
In Algorithm 1, we describe the process of allocating virtual machines using reinforce-
ment learning, combining a Q-learning policy with the migration mechanism based on the
Firefly algorithm.
Algorithm 1: Reinforcement Learning for Vm Placement
1: Input: (vmsToMigrate, excludedHosts)
2: Output: Label for any host
3: power = 0, powerLast = 0, newstate = 0, statindex = 0
4: firstFitDecreasing (vmsToMigrate, excludedHosts)
▷Apply the initial mapping
5: init ()
▷Initialize action and Q-value
6: for episode in range (NUM_EPISODES) do
7: Restartstate ()
8: for step in range (MAX_STEPS_PER_EPISODE) do
9:
currentState = getState ()
10:
powlast = powerBeforconsumption(hostslist)
11:
statindex = getStateIndex(currentState)
12:
action = exploreExploit (statindex, episode)
13:
if action == 0 then
14:
vmslist = getVmsToMigrateFromOverHost(host)
15:
FireflyAlgorithm(vmslist)
16:
end if
17:
if action is ==−1 then
18:
vmslist = getVmsToMigrateFromUnderHost(host)
19:
FireflyAlgorithm (Listevms)
20:
end if
21:
pow = PowerAfterconsumption(Hostslist)
22:
updateQValue (statindex, action, pow, powlast, currentState, newstate)
23:
currentState = newState
24: end for
25: end for
5.2. VM Allocation with Firefly (FA)
The Firefly algorithm is a metaheuristic optimization algorithm inspired by the flashing
behavior of fireflies. In this algorithm, fireflies are considered agents in the search space, and
their blinking brightness is the objective function value, as shown in Algorithm 2. Fireflies
are attracted to the brighter ones and move towards them in search of better solutions. This
movement is governed by the attraction of other fireflies, which depends on their brightness
and distance. As the algorithm progresses, the fireflies converge on the optimal solution,
displaying swarm intelligence. The Firefly algorithm has been successfully applied to
a variety of optimizing problems due to its simplicity, efficiency, and ability to handle
complex search spaces. In our Firefly algorithm, we use the optimization equation [28].
f (mapping) =
NPMs
∑
i=1
loadPMi−loadaverage

(14)
Network 2025, 5, 17
14 of 24
where NPMs is the total number of PMs, loadPMi represents the load of PMi, and loadaverage
is the average load of all PMs.
Algorithm 2: VM Allocation with Firefly using RF_SOM model
1: Input: vmList, hostList
2: Output: Allocation of VMs
3:
averageLoad←calculateAverageLoad(hostList)
4: for each vm in vmList do
5:
Initialize bestHost←null and minLoadDiff←Double.MAX _VALUE
6:
if vm is sensitive then
▷Test with (RF + SOM) Model
7:
for each host in hostList do
8:
current Load←host.getLoad()
9:
loadDiff←|currentLoad-averageLoad|
10:
if
loadDiff
<
minLoadDiff then
11:
minLoadDiff←loadDiff
12:
bestHost←host
13:
end if
14:
end for
15:
else
16:
vmList.add(vm)
17:
continue
18:
end if
19: end for
5.3. Baseline Algorithms Form VM Placement
To validate our approach, we have opted for three basic algorithms for the placement
of virtual machines. Below are brief descriptions of these algorithms.
5.3.1. Power Aware Best Fit Decreasing (PABFD) for VM Placement
The PABFD (power aware best fit decreasing) algorithm is a heuristic approach de-
signed for the efficient placement of virtual machines in cloud computing environments,
with the emphasis on minimizing energy consumption. The PABFD algorithm starts by
sorting virtual machines in descending order according to their demand for resources such
as CPU, memory and bandwidth. This ensures that the most demanding virtual machines
are considered first, optimizing the use of available resources.
Once selected, each virtual machine is placed in the host with the lowest energy
consumption, according to a “best fit” strategy. This approach not only improves energy
efficiency but also maintains the performance and reliability of the cloud infrastructure.
The time complexity of the power aware best fit decreasing (PABFD) algorithm for
VM placement can be analyzed by breaking down its primary steps:
Sorting VMs: sort the VMs in decreasing order based on their resource demands. If
there are N VMs, the sorting step has a time complexity of O(N log(N).
Placement of VMs: place each VM into a physical host. Let M be the number of
physical hosts. For each VM, the algorithm must check each host to determine the best fit,
which involves evaluating the power consumption for each potential placement. This step
has a time complexity of O(N · M), as it involves iterating through all hosts for each VM.
Combining these two steps, the overall time complexity of the PABFD algorithm is
O(N log(N) + O(N · M). In summary, the time complexity is O(N log(N) + N · M.
The sorting step typically dominates when the number of hosts M is significantly
smaller than the number of VMs n, but in scenarios where M is comparable to N, both
Network 2025, 5, 17
15 of 24
terms contribute significantly to the complexity. The detailed steps of the PABFD algorithm
are presented in the following Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3: PABFD for VM placement
1: Input: vmLists, hostLists, nparticles, maxIter
2: Initialize particles randomly
3: for i = 1 to maxIter do
4:
Evaluate energy consumption-based function for each particle based on vms and
hosts
5:
Update personal best positions for each particle
6:
Update global best position
7:
for each particle do
8:
Update velocity and position based on personal and global best positions
9:
end for
10: Return Best VM placement configuration found
11: end for
5.3.2. Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) for VM Placement
PSO (particle swarm optimization) is a computer optimization technology inspired
by the social behavior of birds in flight or fish in schools. In PSO, a population of solution
candidates, called particles, moves through the search space. Each individual particle
adjusts its position according to its own experience and that of neighboring particles. To
adapt PSO to this discrete optimization problem, we can use a binary representation in
which each particle represents a possible assignment of virtual machines to hosts. The
following steps outline the adaptation process.
Step 1 (particle initialization): The process starts by defining a specific number of
particles for optimization. For each particle, we randomly generate an initial VM placement
configuration in our CloudSim environment. Each configuration is represented by a list of
maps, associating each VM with a host.
Step 2 (evaluation of solution quality): a special power consumption-based function
to evaluate each VM placement configuration. This function, adapted to our CloudSim
environment, is designed to measure the energy consumption of each configuration.
Step 3 (updating best positions): Each particle keeps in memory the best VM placement
configuration found so far (personal best position), based on the results of the energy
consumption-based function.
Step 4 (updating global best position): We find the best VM placement configuration
among all the particles (best overall position), which ensures that our proposal comes close
to the optimum solution in terms of minimizing energy consumption.
Step 5 (updating particle velocity and position): This step uses a power consumption-
based function to evaluate each configuration. The velocity and position of each particle
are then updated based on the personal best and global best positions, following the PSO
update equations adapted to our CloudSim environment.
Step 6 (repeat steps 2 to 5 until convergence): We iterate the process of evaluation,
using the standard PSO update equations, adapted to the discrete nature of VM placement
in CloudSim.
Step 7 (obtaining the optimal solution): When the algorithm converges, the best VM
placement configuration (i.e., the global best position) represents the optimal or near-
optimal solution for minimizing energy consumption in our CloudSim environment, in
accordance with our proposal.
Network 2025, 5, 17
16 of 24
The time complexity of the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm is influenced
by the number of particles (P), the number of dimensions (D), and the number of iterations
(T). Each iteration involves evaluating the fitness function for each particle, updating their
velocities and positions, and adjusting their personal and global bests. The time complexity
per iteration is O(P · (F + 2D)), where F represents the cost of the fitness function evalua-
tion. Thus, for T iterations, the overall time complexity is O(T · P · (F + 2D)), which can
often be approximated as O(T · P · F) if the fitness evaluation is the most computationally
expensive operation. The detailed steps of the PSO-based VM placement algorithm are
presented in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4: PSO for VM placement
1: Input: vmLists, hostLists, nparticles, maxIter
2: Initialize particles randomly
3: for i = 1 to maxIter do
4:
Evaluate energy consumption-based function for each particle based on vms and
hosts
5:
Update personal best positions for each particle
6:
Update global best position
7:
for each particle do
8:
Update velocity and position based on personal and global best positions
9:
end for
10:
Return Best VM placement configuration found
11: end for
5.3.3. Genetic Algorithms (GAs) for VM Placement
Genetic algorithms (GAs) are a type of evolutionary algorithm inspired by the process
of natural selection and genetics. They are used to solve optimization and search problems
by mimicking the process of natural selection.
Initializing the population: We start by creating an initial population comprising
individuals, each representing a potential solution to the VM placement problem. These
individuals are characterized by a list of host identifiers for every VM, denoting feasible
placement locations.
Evaluating the population: Subsequently, we evaluate each individual within the
population using a designated fitness function. This function enables us to gauge the
efficacy of each solution based on factors such as resource utilization and load balancing.
Selecting the best individuals: We proceed by identifying the highest-performing indi-
viduals, those exhibiting superior fitness values, for replication. Various selection strategies,
including tournament selection or probability-based approaches, may be employed.
Crossing over selected individuals: Selected individuals are crossed over to produce
new offspring to engender new offspring, thus amalgamating attributes from their parent
individuals. Crossover mechanisms, such as single-point or two-point crossover, are
employed for this process.
Mutating the new individuals: To foster genetic diversity, a small sub-set of the newly
generated offspring undergoes mutation. This random mutation introduces diversity and
helps avoid early convergence to suboptimal results.
Replacing the population: The new offspring subsequently supplant the existing
population, helping the algorithm gradually improve its solutions. Only the most high-
performing individuals are retained for each subsequent generation.
Network 2025, 5, 17
17 of 24
Choosing the best solution: After evaluating all the generations, we select the optimum
solution from all the individuals. This solution defines the ideal placement of VMs on the
available hosts.
Constructing the migration map: Based on the optimal solution, we build the migration
map, associating each virtual machine with its assigned host.
Returning the migration map: In the end, we provide the migration map as the result
of the genetic algorithm, offering an efficient and balanced VM placement strategy.
The time complexity of a genetic algorithm (GA) depends on the population size
(P), the number of generations (G), and the complexity of the fitness function evaluation
(F). Each generation involves evaluating the fitness of all individuals, which is O(P · F),
followed by selection, crossover, and mutation operations, typically O(P) each. Therefore,
the overall time complexity per generation is dominated by the fitness evaluation, making it
O(P · F). For G generations, the total time complexity of the GA is O(G · P · F). This reflects
that the primary computational cost arises from the repeated fitness evaluation across
generations. The detailed steps of the GA-based VM placement algorithm are presented in
Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5: GA for VM placement
1: Inputs: vmsToMigrate, excludedHosts
2: Outputs: migrationMap
3: Initialize a population of populationSize individuals
4: for generation = 1 to maxGenerations do
5:
Evaluate the population using a fitness function
6:
Select the best individuals for reproduction
7:
Cross over selected individuals to create new individuals
8:
Mutate new individuals to introduce genetic diversity
9:
Replace the population with the new individuals
10: end for
11: Choose the best individual from the population
12: Build migrationMap for the best solution
13: Return migrationMap
6. Simulation Setup
We chose 10 random days in 2019 and used traces from over 1000 virtual machines.
Usage measurements were recorded at 5 min intervals. The choice of these 10 random days
and virtual machine traces was guided by technical considerations in order to align our
calculations with CloudSim’s architecture [29]. The simulated cloud environment consists
of a data center with 800 homogeneous host computers distributed over four models. The
configurations of these servers, detailed in Table 4, are based on the specifications provided
in [30].
Table 4. Hosts’ specifications.
Name
MIPS
Core
RAM (MB)
Bandwidth (Gbps)
Number of Hosts
Hp ProLiantMl110G4 Xeon3040
1860
2
4096
1
200
Hp ProLiantMl110G5 Xeon 3075
2660
2
4096
1
200
Hp ProLiantDL360G7 XeonX5675
3067
16
16,384
1
200
Hp ProLiantDL36 0G9 XeonE5-2699
2300
32
65,536
1
200
Network 2025, 5, 17
18 of 24
Furthermore, to implement the power model in CloudSim, the power consumption at
different load levels is illustrated in Table 5 and is based on [30].
Table 5. Power consumption (watts) at different load levels.
Name
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Hp ProLiantMl110G4 Xeon3040
86
89.4
92.6
96
99.5
102
106
108
112
114
117
Hp ProLiantMl110G5 Xeon 3075
93.7
97.0
101
105
110
116
121
125
129
133
135
Hp ProLiantDL360G7 XeonX5675
55.6
95.4
107
115
124
133
142
155
173
192
216
Hp ProLiantDL36 0G9 XeonE5-2699
45
83.7
101
118
133
145
162
188
218
248
276
More than 1000 heterogeneous virtual machines were deployed in response to users’
requests. The characteristic of the VM types is shown in Table 6 and are based on Amazon
EC2 [31]. All virtual machines are single core.
Table 6. VMs’ specifications.
VM Type
MIPS
Core (Processing
Elements)
RAM
(MB)
Bandwidth
(Mbps)
High-CPU Medium Instance
2500
1
870
100
Extra-Large Instance
2000
1
1740
100
Small Instance
1000
1
1740
100
Micro-Instance
500
1
613
100
The initial allocation of virtual machines is based on the resource requirements de-
fined by the virtual machine type. However, during their lifetime, virtual machines use
fewer resources according to workload variation, which allows dynamic virtual machine
consolidation. To conduct our experiments, we used real workload traces collected from
Microsoft Azure nodes in 2019. The dataset includes CPU utilization data sampled every
5 min, covering randomly selected 10 days and involving more than 1000 virtual machines.
The number of virtual machines used on each of the 10 days is summarized in Table 7.
Table 7. Number of virtual machines per day.
Date
Number of Virtual Machines
DAY 1
1052
DAY 2
898
DAY 3
1061
DAY 4
1516
DAY 5
1078
DAY 6
1463
DAY 7
1358
DAY 8
1233
DAY 9
1054
DAY 10
1033
7. Results and Discussion
In this study, we compare the proposed Q-learning–Firefly-based method’s three base-
line algorithms: power aware best fit decreasing (PABFD), particle swarm optimization
Network 2025, 5, 17
19 of 24
(PSO), and genetic algorithm (GA). These methods have been selected due to their preva-
lence in the literature and their role as standard baselines in the field of virtual machine
(VM) consolidation and energy-aware resource management. PABFD serves as a classical
heuristic benchmark [32], while PSO and GA represent benchmark model for metaheuristic
algorithms. Although more recent techniques exist, these methods are still commonly
adopted for performance comparison, providing a reliable reference for evaluating the
effectiveness of our approach and the performance of the proposed Q-learning model com-
bined with the Firefly algorithm. To ensure robustness in our evaluation, we considered
two types of host behavior models: lr_1.2_mmt and iqr_1.5_mc as described in [33].
•
IqrMc: Inter Quartile Range Maximum correlation. This method employs a VM
allocation strategy based on the Inter Quartile Range (IQR) hotspot detection technique,
combined with a policy that selects VMs with maximum correlation.
•
LrMmt: Using a method derived from Cleveland (local regression), LrMmt identifies
whether a host is over-utilized and whether its VMs need to be migrated. If a host
is overused, LrMmt selects a VM that requires the least migration time, using the
minimum migration time technique.
The Figure 4 illustrates that our model can significantly reduce energy consumption
compared to both behaviors. Furthermore, stricter constraints positively impact energy
consumption, enabling even greater energy savings.
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Day1
Day2
Day3
Day4
Day5
Day6
Day7
Day8
Day9
Day10
Energy consumption (Kwh)
workload datasets
Energy consumption (Kwh
QL Ir_mmt_1.2
QL Iqr_mc_1.5
PABFD Ir_mmt_1.2
PABFD Iqr_mc_1.5
PSO Ir_mmt_1.2
PSO Iqr_mc_1.5
Genetic Ir_mmt_1.2
Genetic Iqr_mc_1.5
Figure 4. Energy consumption (Kwh) under different workload datasets.
Upon analyzing Figures 4 and 5, it becomes evident that leveraging VM placement
through reinforcement learning with Firefly results in the lowest energy consumption
among the examined methods. Specifically, under the Ir mmt 1,2 strategy, our model
combining QL and Firefly achieves a reduction of 5.40% compared to PABFD, 12.80%
compared to PSO, and 12% compared to genetic algorithms.
Likewise, under the Iqr mc 1,5 strategy, our model achieves a reduction of 12.11%
compared to PABFD, 15.60% compared to PSO, and 18.67% compared to genetic algorithms.
The number of live migrations remains a key factor affecting energy consumption
and service level agreement (SLA) violations. Reducing this number can lessen the overall
data center load, consequently reducing SLA breaches. As shown in Figures 6 and 7, our
approach achieves the fewest live migrations over the entire 10 days. Additionally, our VM
selection policy (QL with Firefly) results in a smaller number of live migrations compared
to other VM selection policies.
Network 2025, 5, 17
20 of 24
 
Figure 5. Average energy consumption (Kwh).
 
Figure 6. Comparison of virtual machine migration counts under different loads.
 
5155
6173
8943
7185
9928
7525
9660
7774
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
Ir_mmt_1.2
Iqr_mc_1.5
Ir_mmt_1.2
Iqr_mc_1.5
Ir_mmt_1.2
Iqr_mc_1.5
Ir_mmt_1.2
Iqr_mc_1.5
QL
PABFD
PSO
Genetic
Average number of migrations
Average number of migrations
Figure 7. Average number of migrations.
Figure 8 displays the percentage of service level agreement (SLA) violations. Our
model surpasses other schemes in both iqr_1.5 mc and lr_1.2 mmt strategies, maintaining a
Network 2025, 5, 17
21 of 24
consistently low value over the ten days. The SLA is upheld by QL with Firefly due to its
lower migration count.
 
Figure 8. SLA violation under different workload datasets.
To rigorously evaluate our approach, we conducted an in-depth statistical analysis
of energy consumption over a 10-day simulation period. Table 8 summarizes several key
descriptive metrics: mean, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, median, interquartile
range (IQR), variance, and coefficient of variation (CV%).
Table 8. Statistical analysis of energy consumption over 10-day simulation.
Method
Mean
Std Dev
Min
Max
Median
IQR
Variance
CV (%)
QL_Ir_mmt_1_2
22.43
4.58
16.68
32.21
21.51
4.46
21.00
20.43
QL_Iqr_mc_1_5
23.05
4.99
16.68
32.20
22.54
6.96
24.91
21.66
PABFD_Ir_mmt_1_2
23.64
5.33
16.68
35.45
23.26
4.12
28.40
22.54
PABFD_Iqr_mc_1_5
25.84
6.78
16.68
38.38
26.54
8.66
45.95
26.24
PSO_Iqr_mc_1_5
26.64
6.40
18.06
37.38
26.04
9.03
41.00
24.04
PSO_Ir_mmt_1_2
25.29
5.61
17.68
36.45
23.77
6.12
31.46
22.17
GA_Iqr_mc_1_5
27.35
5.98
18.90
38.78
26.80
5.93
35.79
21.87
GA_Ir_mmt_1_2
25.11
5.41
17.50
36.47
24.54
4.77
29.24
21.54
This analysis goes beyond a simple comparison of average results, offering a more
comprehensive view of each method’s energy performance and robustness:
•
The mean provides a general measure of energy efficiency.
•
The standard deviation, variance, and CV% reveal how consistent and predictable the
methods are across different workload conditions. A lower CV indicates more stable
energy consumption, which is essential in real-world data center operations.
•
The median and IQR give additional insight into the distribution of results, reducing
the influence of occasional spikes or anomalies.
Among all the evaluated methods, QL_Ir_mmt_1_2 stands out with the lowest average
consumption (22.43 kWh) and one of the most stable profiles (CV = 20.43%). This balance
between efficiency and consistency highlights the strength of reinforcement learning (QL),
which can dynamically adapt to changing workloads while maintaining steady energy
usage. In contrast, traditional approaches such as GA and PSO not only consume more
Network 2025, 5, 17
22 of 24
energy on average but also display higher variability (e.g., CV > 24%), suggesting a greater
risk of inconsistent performance.
From a practical standpoint, these findings imply that using QL-based strategies could
help cloud providers lower energy costs while improving service reliability. This marks a
clear departure from conventional VM placement methods, which often depend on static
or manually tuned heuristics that lack adaptability. By contrast, our RL-based approach
offers a more autonomous and resilient solution—especially important in dynamic, real-
world environments.
In summary, the statistical evidence not only confirms the quantitative benefits of
our approach but also reinforces its practical value: methods that combine low average
consumption with high stability reduce operational risks and improve cost efficiency, which
is crucial for meeting service level agreements (SLAs) in modern cloud infrastructures.
Our model excels by effectively integrating reinforcement learning with the Firefly
algorithm to optimize virtual machine (VM) placement. Leveraging Q-learning, our ap-
proach balances exploration and exploitation of VM placement configurations, dynamically
adjusting decisions based on changing data center conditions. The Firefly algorithm com-
plements this strategy by minimizing energy consumption through strategic configuration
selection, which reduces VM migrations while maintaining high service levels. This combi-
nation enables our model to achieve superior performance in energy efficiency and SLA
compliance compared to traditional approaches in data center management.
8. Conclusions and Future Work
Energy consumption is a persistent challenge in cloud data centers, which prompted
us to develop an energy-sensitive management algorithm. Our approach focuses on
optimizing virtual machine deployment to minimize the number of active physical ma-
chines, thereby reducing overall energy consumption in cloud environments. Leveraging
reinforcement-learning techniques, our methodology aims to achieve significant energy
savings, aligning with sustainable practices crucial to modern data center operations. Our
research highlights the effectiveness of machine learning in achieving energy savings
targets. Through rigorous experimentation and validation, we have demonstrated that
reinforcement learning can adaptively optimize resource allocation, ensuring efficient use
of IT resources while maintaining service level agreements (SLAs). This capability not only
reduces operational costs but also contributes to environmental sustainability by reducing
the carbon footprint associated with data center operations. In the future, our efforts will
extend to optimizing thermal energy management and improving cooling systems in data
centers. These advances are essential if we are to meet the multiple challenges posed by
escalating energy demand and heat dissipation issues in cloud infrastructures. By delving
deeper into these areas, we aim to develop innovative solutions that improve both the
ecological footprint and operational efficiency of cloud computing environments.
In conclusion, our ongoing research seeks to advance the field of energy-efficient data
center management through the integration of advanced machine learning techniques
and sustainable infrastructure practices. By continuously refining our methodologies and
exploring new avenues for improvement, we strive to contribute meaningfully to the
long-term sustainability and performance optimization of cloud data centers worldwide.
In this study, we used the SLA_TAH metric to track hosts that experienced overload,
as it is widely adopted in the literature and provides a straightforward indication based
on CPU saturation. However, other factors such as memory usage, disk I/O, and network
bandwidth can also contribute to host overload. In future work, we plan to adopt a more
general and comprehensive metric that takes into account these multi-resource aspects, in
Network 2025, 5, 17
23 of 24
order to better reflect the real performance state of cloud hosts and support more accurate
and adaptive management decisions.
We also plan to broaden our research to include the optimization of thermal energy
management and the enhancement of cooling systems within data centers. These initiatives
are driven by the critical need to further address energy consumption challenges and
enhance the overall efficiency of cloud computing infrastructure. By exploring these areas
in depth, we aim to develop innovative solutions that not only reduce environmental impact
but also bolster the sustainability and performance of data center operations. Additionally,
we plan to test our approach on larger-scale simulations, potentially using tools like
CloudSim Plus or iCanCloud. We are also exploring integration with real-time cloud
orchestration frameworks to assess performance in production-like environments.
Author Contributions: A.A.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing-
original draft, Visualization, Investigation, Data Curation. Y.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Supervision, Visualization, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing—review & editing, Data Curation.
S.E.K.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Investigation, Project administration, Formal
analysis, Writing—review & editing, Data Curation. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research has no funding.
Data Availability Statement: Data is contained within the article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
References
1.
Wen, J.; Chen, Z.; Jin, X.; Liu, X. Rise of the planet of serverless computing: A systematic review. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.
2023, 32, 1–61. [CrossRef]
2.
de Lima, E.C.; Rossi, F.D.; Luizelli, M.C.; Calheiros, R.N.; Lorenzon, A.F. A neural network framework for optimizing parallel
computing in cloud servers. J. Syst. Archit. 2024, 150, 103131. [CrossRef]
3.
Lima, J. Data Centres of the World Will Consume 1/5 of Earth’s Power by 2025; Data Economy: London, UK, 2017.
4.
Buyya, R.; Ilager, S.; Arroba, P. Energy-efficiency and sustainability in new generation cloud computing: A vision and directions
for integrated management of data centre resources and workloads. Softw. Pract. Exp. 2024, 54, 24–38. [CrossRef]
5.
Kotteswari, K.; Dhanaraj, R.K.; Balusamy, B.; Nayyar, A.; Sharma, A.K. EELB: An energy-efficient load balancing model for cloud
environment using Markov decision process. Computing 2025, 107, 81. [CrossRef]
6.
Rasoulpour Shabestari, E.; Shameli-Sendi, A. An Intelligent VM Placement Method for Minimizing Energy Cost and Carbon
Emission in Distributed Cloud Data Centers. J. Grid Comput. 2025, 23, 12. [CrossRef]
7.
Qazi, F.; Kwak, D.; Khan, F.G.; Ali, F.; Khan, S.U. Service Level Agreement in cloud computing: Taxonomy, prospects, and
challenges. Internet Things 2024, 25, 101126. [CrossRef]
8.
Singh, J.; Walia, N.K. A Comprehensive Review of Cloud Computing Virtual Machine Consolidation. IEEE Access 2023, 11,
106190–106209. [CrossRef]
9.
Ma, Z.; Ma, D.; Lv, M.; Liu, Y. Virtual machine migration techniques for optimizing energy consumption in cloud data centers.
IEEE Access 2023, 11, 86739–86753. [CrossRef]
10.
Rahmani, S.; Khajehvand, V.; Torabian, M. SPP: Stochastic process-based placement for VM consolidation in cloud environments.
Computing 2025, 107, 43. [CrossRef]
11.
Yin, S. Random Forest-Based Load Prediction for Cloud Data Centers. In Proceedings of the 2024 IEEE 7th International
Conference on Information Systems and Computer Aided Education (ICISCAE), Dalian, China, 27–29 September 2024; IEEE:
New York, NY, USA, 2024; pp. 945–950.
12.
Peng, P. Predicting residential building cooling load with a machine learning random forest approach. Int. J. Interact. Des. Manuf.
(IJIDeM) 2025, 19, 3421–3434. [CrossRef]
13.
Abdelaziz, A.; Santos, V.; Dias, M.S.; Mahmoud, A.N. A hybrid model of self-organizing map and deep learning with genetic
algorithm for managing energy consumption in public buildings. J. Clean. Prod. 2024, 434, 140040. [CrossRef]
14.
Kumar, V.; Kumar, D. A systematic review on firefly algorithm: Past, present, and future. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2021, 28,
3269–3291. [CrossRef]
Network 2025, 5, 17
24 of 24
15.
Qasim, M.; Sajid, M. An efficient IoT task scheduling algorithm in cloud environment using modified Firefly algorithm. Int. J. Inf.
Technol. 2024, 17, 179–188. [CrossRef]
16.
Aghasi, A.; Jamshidi, K.; Bohlooli, A.; Javadi, B. A decentralized adaptation of model-free Q-learning for thermal-aware
energy-efficient virtual machine placement in cloud data centers. Comput. Netw. 2023, 224, 109624. [CrossRef]
17.
Jeong, E.D.; Yoo, J.H.; Hong, J.W.K. Sdn lullaby: Vm consolidation for sdn using transformer-based deep reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the 2023 19th International Conference on Network and Service Management (CNSM), Niagara Falls, ON,
Canada, 30 October–2 November 2023; IEEE: New York, NY, USA, 2023; pp. 1–5.
18.
Mikram, H.; El Kafhali, S.; Saadi, Y. Metaheuristic Algorithms Based Server Consolidation for Tasks Scheduling in Cloud
Computing Environment. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Computer Vision,
Marrakesh, Morocco, 5–7 March 2023; Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 477–486.
19.
Saadi, Y.; Jounaidi, S.; El Kafhali, S.; Zougagh, H. Reducing energy footprint in cloud computing: A study on the impact of
clustering techniques and scheduling algorithms for scientific workflows. Computing 2023, 105, 2231–2261. [CrossRef]
20.
Helali, L.; Omri, M.N. A survey of data center consolidation in cloud computing systems. Comput. Sci. Rev. 2021, 39, 100366.
[CrossRef]
21.
Gholipour, N.; Shoeibi, N.; Arianyan, E. An energy-aware dynamic resource management technique using deep q-learning
algorithm and joint VM and container consolidation approach for green computing in cloud data centers. In Distributed Computing
and Artificial Intelligence, Special Sessions, 17th International Conference; Springer International Publishing: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2021; pp. 227–233.
22.
Tran, C.H.; Bui, T.K.; Pham, T.V. Virtual machine migration policy for multi-tier application in cloud computing based on
Q-learning algorithm. Computing 2022, 104, 1285–1306. [CrossRef]
23.
Qin, Y.; Wang, H.; Yi, S.; Li, X.; Zhai, L. Virtual machine placement based on multi-objective reinforcement learning. Appl. Intell.
2020, 50, 2370–2383. [CrossRef]
24.
Lin, W.; Yu, T.; Gao, C.; Liu, F.; Li, T.; Fong, S.; Wang, Y. A hardware-aware CPU power measurement based on the power-exponent
function model for cloud servers. Inf. Sci. 2021, 547, 1045–1065. [CrossRef]
25.
Mongia, V. EMaC: Dynamic VM Consolidation Framework for Energy-Efficiency and Multi-metric SLA Compliance in Cloud
Data Centers. SN Comput. Sci. 2024, 5, 643. [CrossRef]
26.
AzurePublicDataset. Available online: https://github.com/Azure/AzurePublicDataset (accessed on 15 March 2025).
27.
Amahrouch, A.; Bouhamidi, M.; Saadi, Y.; El Kafhali, S. An Efficient Model based on Machine Learning Algorithms for Virtual
Machines Classification in Cloud Computing Environment. In Proceedings of the 2024 4th International Conference on Innovative
Research in Applied Science, Engineering and Technology (IRASET), Fez, Morocco, 16–17 May 2024; IEEE: New York, NY, USA,
2024; pp. 1–6.
28.
Srivastava, A.; Kumar, N. An efficient firefly and honeybee based load balancing mechanism in cloud infrastructure. Clust.
Comput. 2024, 27, 2805–2827. [CrossRef]
29.
Calheiros, R.N.; Ranjan, R.; Beloglazov, A.; De Rose, C.A.; Buyya, R. CloudSim: A toolkit for modeling and simulation of cloud
computing environments and evaluation of resource provisioning algorithms. Softw. Pract. Exp. 2011, 41, 23–50. [CrossRef]
30.
Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation. Available online: https://www.spec.org/power_ssj2008/results/ (accessed on
15 March 2025).
31.
Amazon EC2 Instance Types. Available online: https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types (accessed on 15 March 2025).
32.
Beloglazov, A.; Buyya, R. Optimal online deterministic al-gorithms and adaptive heuristics for energy and performance efficient
dynamic consolidation of virtual machines in cloud data centers. Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp. 2012, 24, 1397–1420. [CrossRef]
33.
Wang, J.; Gu, H.; Yu, J.; Song, Y.; He, X.; Song, Y. Research on virtual machine consolidation strategy based on combined prediction
and energy-aware in cloud computing platform. J. Cloud Comput. 2022, 11, 50. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
